.TH CHIP8 1 "March 2018" "version 0.1.0"
.SH NAME
chip8 \- emulate the Chip-8/Super-Chip platform
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B chip8
[\fB\-\-frequency\fR \fIFREQ\fR]
[\fB\-l\fR|\fB\-\-load\-quirks\fR]
[\fB\-q\fR|\fB\-\-shift\-quirks\fR]
[(\fB\-s\fR|\fB\-\-scale\fR) \fISCALE\fR]
[(\fB\-t\fR|\fB\-\-tone\fR) \fIFREQ\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR|\fB\-\-verbose\fR]
[\fB\-\-volume\fR \fIVOL\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR]
[\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR]
.I FILE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chip8
emulates the Chip\-8 and Super\-Chip platforms, providing a complete environment
for running games designed for those systems.
.PP
\fBchip8\fR intends to be fully compatible with all widely available
Chip\-8/Super\-Chip games.
.
This goal has been achieved for the Chip\-8, while some more work is needed to
ensure correct behavior of some Super\-Chip games.
.
Some issues in emulation arise due to the wide variety of emulators already
available, some of which have conflicting implementations of some instructions.
.
To support games that rely on a particular behavior, \fBchip8\fR supports two
"quirks" modes, "shift quirks" and "load quirks", each of which changes the
behavior of certain instructions.
.
The reference manual (distributed as a Texinfo file) describes these special
modes in more detail, including exact descriptions of the changes in behavior.
.PP
The reference manual also provides more information about the Chip\-8 and
Super\-Chip themselves, with a description of their history and a description
of the features available on each platform.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-frequency =\fIFREQ\fR
Set the game timer frequency (in Hz).
.
Default is 60.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-load\-quirks
Enable load quirks mode.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-shift\-quirks
Enable shift quirks mode.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-scale =\fISCALE\fR
Set game display scale.
.
Default is 6.
.
In high-resolution (Super\-Chip) mode, the emulator will display each in-game
pixel as \fISCALE\fR square pixels on the user's display.
.
In low-resolution (Chip\-8) mode, the \fISCALE\fR parameter is effectively
doubled, so that the emulator window will be the same size as if it were
displaying high-resolution content.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-tone =\fIFREQ\fR
Set game buzzer tone (in Hz).
.
Default is 440.
.
The sound capabilities of the Chip\-8 are limited to a single, monotone pitch,
which in this implementation is a sine wave.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Increase verbosity.
.
Each repetition of this flag will enable an additional level of logging output.
.
In order of decreasing severity, the log levels are ERROR, WARNING, INFO and
DEBUG.
.
By default, only messages at the ERROR and WARNING levels are shown.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a brief help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version information and exit.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chip8asm (1),
.BR chip8disasm (1)
