\input texinfo
@setfilename chip8.info
@settitle Chip-8 0.1.0

@copying
This manual is for Chip-8, version 0.1.0.

Copyright @copyright{} 2017 Ian Johnson

@quotation
This work is licensed under a
@url{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/,,Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License}.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Chip-8 Reference
@subtitle Version 0.1.0
@author Ian Johnson (@email{ianprime0509@@gmail.com})

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Print the table of contents at the start.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Chip-8 Reference Guide

This is a reference guide for the Chip-8 interpreter and assembler
developed by Ian Johnson. It also contains documentation on the Chip-8
and Super-Chip platforms themselves.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::        An overview of the Chip-8 project.
* Further reading::  More information about the Chip-8 and Super-Chip.
* Index::           Complete index.
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@cindex overview

An overview goes here.

@node Further reading
@chapter Further reading
@cindex further reading
@cindex reading, further

There are several good resources on the Web for Chip-8 information. For
a Chip-8 instruction/opcode reference, see
@url{http://devernay.free.fr/hacks/chip8/C8TECH10.HTM,Cowgod's Chip-8
Technical Reference}; it also lists the opcodes for Super-Chip
instructions, but does not give their descriptions. For a collection of
many Chip-8 and Super-Chip games, as well as an emulator for DOS, see
@url{http://www.pong-story.com/chip8/,David Winter's Chip-8 page}. There
is also some documentation included with his emulator, which gives some
more background on the Chip-8, including details about some variant
implementations.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@cindex index

@printindex cp

@bye
